In this video I'd like to go over the basics of using the code lights ideas to bugger all the ideas
have some sort of debugger built in and they all work more or less the same.
There are some differences between them but they all have points they all have watches and they all
that you see are local variables which is really all we're interested in right now.
So I'm in the section 12 workspace and I've got a project called debugger that's got some source code
that I want to debug.
So what do I do.
Well the first thing you want to do is rather than build We're going to do debug.
So we're going to press 5 but we're not going to do that quite yet.
I want to set up this environment first because right now I'm on a single monitor system and it's much
nicer to work obviously with a dual monitor system so you can you have your console in one area and
the debugger on the other.
But on a single monitor system you need to make a make some room here.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to grab this and just move it over here.
It fills up half the screen.
Move it over here so it fills up half the screen.
Ok then when I debug I want the console window over here on the right but I don't really want it to
take up half the screen.
I don't need it to take up half this means I'm just going to have this guy over to about there and that
should allow me to see all of the icons that we can use up top to control the debugger.
And again this is just a personal preference you can do this whatever you like.
That works for you.
The next thing we need to do is we need to set a breakpoint you need to set a breakpoint for the debugger.
Now I'm going to do that right in main.
If you look right next to line 16 here not in this little gray gutter area right here where the arrow
is but right to the left of that you can click right in there and you see that little red stop sign
comes up that's a break point.
What's going to happen is the debuggers is going to kick in and it's going to start executing your code
then it's going to stop at that break point.
From there you can go line by line you can go into functions you can look at watches you can do all
kinds of stuff which is pretty cool.
Right.
So that's where we're at now.
Now you also notice up here in perspective there's a debug way out.
This is the layout that will automatically kick in when you start the debugger.
So it may look different on your end and from then on what you're going to see on my end but it's totally
customizable.
You can do whatever you like close windows open windows and when you're done just get a perspective
save.
Currently out as de-bug lay out again.
So next time you run it'll be in that perspective.
All right so let's debug.
We're going to come up to the debugger and start continue debug or you can press F5 make sure you've
got a breakpoint set before you do this.
Otherwise you're not going to see much.
So we're going to go to the debugger and start it build and debug.
Now go see the console know what I'm going to do with the console.
Just move it over to the right so it fills up the rest of that space.
There you go.
So all the output I'm going to see over here on the right.
You'll notice down here that I've got an output view and I've got a debugger view.
I really don't care about this output.
I just want to look at my debugger view so you can close this site if you like.
You can just click that X right there and I've got only the debugger view.
Now in the debugger view there's a lot of stuff in here.
All we're really interested in at this level right now are your local variables and any watches you
might want.
And I'll talk about watches in a second.
Cool.
OK.
So you can see here my local variables x and y.
If you look at main you'll see I you'll see X and go see y x and y right here on line 22.
You also see that little break point right there the red is a little green arrow and there I'm not sure
if you'll be able to see it on the video but you will be able to see it in a minute when I start walking
through the code.
Basically that's the line that's about to execute.
You'll notice right now x and J have garbage in the mess because line 16 hasn't executed yet.
OK.
So the debug icons appear.
You can see them you can show the current line.
You can step in which is what we're going to use to go into a function.
Or you could just go to the next line.
Don't worry about step out.
These are the two main ones we're going to step in next.
And if you want to stop your debugging session you can press that little stop button right here.
OK.
So let's do this.
And again how you you may want to close your out your workspace view here.
If you don't have a space on your monitor.
But I've got plenty of space here.
So let's start let's click on this button right here next.
And you've got there is your debugger you can also put next you can press F 10 whatever it is on a Mac.
I'm not sure but you can toggle breakpoints you've got a lot of different options here but I'm going
to use these icons for now because it's easier to see what I'm doing.
All right so we're here on line 16.
Let's press that button right here next.
Now when I do that you'll notice that little green arrow will go to the next line.
That means that this line executes.
And we should see down here change to five.
OK.
So I want to do that.
See the green arrow is now on line 17 That's the instruction that looks next.
And also notice that I is now five.
OK.
Sometimes you have to refresh this view down here especially when you're working with pointers if you
need to do that you just click that little button right here and it refreshes that view.
OK so now we're in this code while I is greater than zero we know I is five right.
Sometimes it's pretty handy.
You can just kind of select I right there and press control and you can see eyes five it pops up in
this little tooltip right here.
Right now if I look at x x is garbage because I haven't gotten to that line yet so that can be pretty
handy sometimes but most of that information you'll be able to see here.
OK.
So that's my locals supposed I want to do a watch.
I want to watch i greater than zero so I can come over here and I can select the plus sign and type
the entire expression I greater than zero and press OK.
You can see it's a boolean.
And right now it's true because five is greater than zero.
She could switch between these two.
You can obviously pull this pain out and have it on a dual monitor system.
But right now let's just keep going.
So now i's five and we'll keep clicking on the next you can see I'm in the body of the loop now.
Now we have an output statement so we 65 display out here on the console.
And then you can see the five just display.
Now we're going to detriment.
I see.
I should go down to four down here in my local variables for you and there it is four.
And I'm just in the keep looping through here.
All I'm doing is pressing next week to see my code executing.
It's very similar to what I was doing with my pencil and marker on the screen.
But here you can see it actually happening.
Happening live.
So at this point now becomes zero.
The loop will fail and I'm out of it.
Now I'm executing line 22.
When I when I clicked Next those two variables x and y will be initialized right down here.
So click next and you can see that there are 100 and 200.
Exactly what I expected.
Not execute lines 23 and 24 so we should display X and Y to the console.
There's X there is y.
Ok so far so good.
Now I'm calling the swap function that we wrote in this section and I pass it in the address of X and
the address of Y.
If you just click next here and I'll just skip that and go right next to the next slide.
Well actually it'll call the function but I want to go into that function.
So you want to click this one right here called step in.
So when I select that now I go into the functions I'm starting to execute that function you can see
the green arrow right here on line 9.
And you can see a and b will a and b are pointers and they've already been set.
You could see them right here.
There's a there's be those are the two addresses and you can see their type integer pointers.
Temp is just a regular int.
So if I expand day it tells me what is pointing to which is a 100 expand B.
B is pointing to 200.
OK so now let's walk through the swopped the first line says take what is pointing to.
You know what he's pointing to right here 100 and assign it to temp.
So right now temp has garbage.
So let's do that we'll click next.
And now you see temp has a 100 in it.
Then we're taking what B is pointing to which is 200 and putting it into where it was pointing.
So now I'll go next.
You see right here you see how it didn't refresh.
It doesn't do that with pointers sometimes that's when you have to click this little refreshed style
right there and then just re expand them and you could see that it did do that now.
We'll do the next and refresh one more time and you can see that they've been swapped which is pretty
cool at this point I click next.
This function is done.
Notice that my local variables now are AB in temp.
That's because I mean this function right here.
Those are the local variables.
My watch doesn't apply anymore.
Right.
It's in the main.
So here I'll click Next again.
Now I'm back in Maine.
I'm right here on line 28 and I'm going to display X and Y again.
There's x 200 there's y one hundred.
And our program is done.
OK.
So there's a lot of options that you can do.
You can learn to play with the debugger.
There's really debuggers are awesome the best advice I could give you with a debugger is that they are
they're called debuggers for a purpose because they really help you debug your code.
I wouldn't suggest that you start using a debugger as so much of a learning aid at this moment.
I think it's better just to do it with paper and pencil at the beginning because the debugger itself
has a bit of a learning curve.
So you're learning C++ and you're learning the ID and now you're learning a debugger all at the same
time but in the context of what I just did here it's very very useful.
Suppose you have a bug in your code and the bug was that you know it was greater than or equal to zero
or you had a less than there and maybe you didn't see it when you're looking at your code.
Well when you run it through the debugger bam you'll see the error.
You can fix it right away.
OK so feel free to use the debugger.
Feel free to use the debugger in the challenge exercise for this section.
It might come in handy.